add blog for develop guide on how multiple data source to integrate w… (#2839)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins.md

---
layout: post
title: "Develop guideline: Multiple Data Source in OpenSearch Dashboards and Plugins"
authors:
 - zhyuanqi
date: 2024-05-01
categories:
 - technical-post
meta_keyword: OpenSearch multiple data source, OpenSearch Dashboards

> meta_description: This blog provides a guideline on howw integrate multiple data source with Dashboards pluginds

Author: Should be plugins

For developers seeking to integrate OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources, this blog post aims to offer a concise introduction on how to do it. If you're new to the concept of multiple data sources, consider starting with the article Configuring and using multiple data sources to gain a solid understanding before diving into plugin integration.

## 1. Getting Started

As a developer, you can integrate multiple data sources into dashboards using plugins in just a few steps. In this tutorial, we will provide you with the necessary steps and examples to help you successfully implement, configure, and get started using multiple data sources in OpenSearch Dashboards. 

### 1.1 Step 1: Set up local development

Before getting started, ensure you have set up a local development environment for OpenSearch Dashboards following our developer guide.  Once your Dashboards instance is up and running, you can generate your own Dashboards plugin using the OpenSearch Dashboards Plugin Generator by running the CLI command below:
```

> node scripts/generate_plugin --name my_plugin_name

Reviewer: Unrelated to this pr. But perhaps we can consider updating the cli to include a question to ask if the developers wants to setup their plugin for osd?

Author: I think it includes multiple questions includes what kind of internal plugin and what the part will be. 
```
? Will this plugin be part of the OpenSearch Dashboards repository? Yes
? What type of internal plugin would you like to create (Use arrow keys)
❯ OpenSearch Dashboards Example 
  OpenSearch Dashboards OSS 
  OpenSearch Dashboards OSS Functional Testing 
```

```
 # server/plugin.ts
 import { DataSourcePluginSetup } from '../../../src/plugins/data_source/server'; 
 
 export interface pluginDependencies {
    dataSource: DataSourcePluginSetup;
 }
 
 public async setup(core: CoreSetup, { dataSource }: pluginDependencies) {
    const dataSourceEnabled = dataSource?.dataSourceEnabled;
    if (dataSourceEnabled) {
        dataSource.registerCustomApiSchema(examplePlugin);
 }
 ```
       

### 1.4 Step 4: use opensearch-client, legacy client to establish the connection

**Initialize and utilize multiple data source clients to make API calls**

> Currently, OpenSearch Dashboards allows two types of clients in use, opensearch-js and legacy client. The OpenSearch client is designed for interacting with OpenSearch clusters while legacy client provides compatibility to work with older version of ElasticSearch. 

Author: Sure i will modify this section to make it more general and understandable

// new client
const client = context.core.opensearch.client.asCurrentUser;
```
For Dashboards plugin that integrated with multiple data source, multiple data source provides data source client as below.
```
//legacy client
const client = context.dataSource.opensearch.legacy.getClient(dataSourceId);
const response = client.callAPI(format, params);
//new client
const client = context.dataSource.opensearch.getClient(dataSourceId);
const response = client.transport.request(params);
```
If a Dashboards plugin needs to handle both Multiple Data Source (MDS) and non-MDS scenarios, here's a piece of  example code:
```
export const decideClient = async (
    dataSourceEnabled: boolean,
    request: any
): Promise<LegacyAPICaller> => {
    return dataSourceEnabled
    ? (context.dataSource.opensearch.legacy.getClient(dataSourceId).callAPI as LegacyAPICaller)
    : context.core.opensearch.legacy.client.callAsCurrentUser;
};
```
For more information about multiple data source client, please refer to Multi Data Source Client Management. 

### 1.5 Step 5: register datasource management in Client side

*1.5.1 Client side to register dataSourceManagement*

> For plugin wants to integrate with multiple data source, data source management offers various component interfaces for choosing data sources. These interfaces include single selection, multiple selection, and readonly view options.  To utilize data source UI component interfaces, the dashboards plugin must initialize dataSourceManagement during the initialization process. Subsequently, in the latter part of this blog, we will dive deeper into leveraging these UI component interfaces.

Author: Got this

describe('DataSourceSelectorExample', () => {
  let client: SavedObjectsClientContract;
  const { toasts } = notificationServiceMock.createStartContract();
  
  beforeEach(() => {
    jest.clearAllMocks();
    client = {
      get: jest.fn().mockResolvedValue([]),
    } as any;
  });
  
  it('renders correctly', () => {
    const component = render(
      <DataSourceSelectorExample
        savedObjects={client}
        notifications={toasts}
        onSelectedDataSources={jest.fn()}
        disabled: {false},
        fullWidth: {false},
      />
    );
  });
  expect(component).toMatchSnapshot();
  expect(getByText(component.container, 'Local cluster')).toBeInTheDocument();
});
```
<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/multi_selectable.png">

### 2.3 Data source as a saved object

The data source is stored as a saved object in the Dashboards index. It includes essential information such as its ID, title, endpoint, authentication methods, remote cluster version, and associated plugins.

## 4 FAQ 

Is any UI component provided by dataSourceManagemet used in core?

> Data source selector is now used in devtools, tutorial, saved object management page. You can see the component after enabling data_source.enabed in opensearch_dashbards.yml.

Reviewer: data_source.enabled*

Author: Got it.

> Data source selector is now used in devtools, tutorial, saved object management page. You can see the component after enabling data_source.enabed in opensearch_dashbards.yml.

Author: Got this

---
layout: post
title: "Developer guide: Integrating multiple data sources using OpenSearch Dashboards and plugins"
authors:

>  - zhyuanqi

Reviewer 2: there doesn't seem to be a profile created for 'zhyuanqi' - can you resolve this? 

(would be an appropriate `zhyuanqi.md` file under `_community_members`)

Reviewer 2: Also, got the following error when I ran this locally:

Liquid syntax error (line 245): Expected end_of_string but found colon in "{{ data: indices ? indices : 'Unknown' }}" in /_posts/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins.md

Author: Hi Kris. I have added the author part/ For `Liquid syntax error (line 245): Expected end_of_string but found colon in "{{ data: indices ? indices : 'Unknown' }}" in /_posts/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins.md`, the `{ data: indices ? indices : 'Unknown' }}` is in part of the code block.

Author: added

│   └── ja-JP.json
└── tsconfig.json
```
Refer to [the documentation](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/blob/main/packages/osd-plugin-generator/README.md) for more information on the OpenSearch Dashboards Plugin Generator. Before using multiple data sources, enable the `data_source.enabled` setting, which is disabled by default. Open the `opensearch_dashboards.yml` file, set `data_source.enabled: true`, and save the changes.

### Step 2: Configure plugin to add dependencies

In your Dashboards plugin's `opensearch_dashboards.json` file, add the Data Source and Data Source Management plugins to the `optionalPlugins` section. The Data Source plugin provides clients for connecting to multiple data sources, while the Data Source Management plugin offers generic interfaces for consuming data source components, such as a data source menu or selector.
```
{
  "id": "blogExamplePlugin",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "opensearchDashboardsVersion": "opensearchDashboards",
  "server": true,
  "ui": true,
  "requiredPlugins": ["navigation"],
  "optionalPlugins": ["dataSource", "dataSourceManagement"]
}
```

### Step 3: Add the data source parameter to server-side plugins

> **Server side:** Verify multiple data source enablement and register the plugin API accordingly.

Author: Got it

```
import { IRouter } from '../../../../src/core/server';
import { schema } from '@osd/config-schema';

export function defineRoutes(router: IRouter, dataSourceEnabled: boolean) {
  router.get(
    {
      path: `/api/blog_example_plugin/example`,
      validate: {
        query: schema.object({
          dataSourceId: schema.maybe(schema.string({ defaultValue: '' }))
        }),
      },
    },
    async (context, request, response) => {
      let resp;
      if (dataSourceEnabled && request.query.dataSourceId) {
        const dataSourceId = request.query.dataSourceId;
        const client = await context.dataSource.opensearch.getClient(dataSourceId)
        resp = await client.cat.indices();
      } else {
        resp = await context.core.opensearch.client.asCurrentUser.transport.request({
          method: 'GET',
          path: `_cat/indices`,
        });
      }
      return response.ok({
        body: resp.body,
      });
  });
}
```

### Step 5: Register the Data Source Management plugin in a public folder

Extract the `dataSourceManagement` object in the plugin module in a public folder.

> The Data Source Management plugin provides react components through a generic interface for your OpenSearch Dashboards plugin. To use the data source UI component interfaces, extract the `dataSourceManagement` object from the plugin module in a public folder and pass it to the main application: 

Author: Got it

```
# public/plugin.ts
import { DataSourceManagementPluginSetup } from '../../../src/plugins/data_source_management/public';

export interface PluginSetupDependencies {
  dataSourceManagement: DataSourceManagementPluginSetup;
}

export class BlogExamplePluginPlugin
  implements Plugin<BlogExamplePluginPluginSetup, BlogExamplePluginPluginStart> {
  public setup(
    core: CoreSetup,
    { dataSourceManagement }: PluginSetupDependencies
  ): BlogExamplePluginPluginSetup {
    core.application.register({
      id: 'blogExamplePlugin',
      title: PLUGIN_NAME,
      async mount(params: AppMountParameters) {
        const { renderApp } = await import('./application');
        const [coreStart, depsStart] = await core.getStartServices();
        return renderApp(
          coreStart,
          depsStart as AppPluginStartDependencies,
          params,
          dataSourceManagement
        );
      },
    });
    .....
}
```

Now, use the UI component interfaces provided by the `dataSourceManagement` plugin.

> With the `dataSourceManagement` plugin initialized, you can leverage its component interfaces. The following example demonstrates using the OpenSearch UI combobox as a base component to provide a UI for selecting data sources. It is stateful, fetching available data sources, returning the user's selection through a callback function, and updating the UI accordingly.

Author: Should be the user's/ User do the selection, not developer

```
 # public/components/app.tsx
  const [selectedDataSources, setSelectedDataSources] = useState<string[]>([]);

  const DataSourceSelector = dataSourceManagement.ui.DataSourceSelector;
  const DataSourceSelectorComponent = (
    <DataSourceSelector
      savedObjectsClient={savedObjects.client}
      notifications={notifications.toasts}
      fullWidth={false}
      onSelectedDataSource={(ds) => setSelectedDataSources(ds)}
      disabled={false}
    />
  );
```
Then add an `onClickHandler` to retrieve indexes based on the selected data source:
```
 # public/components/app.tsx   
   const [indices, setIndices] = useState<string[]>([]);
   const onClickHandler = async () => {
     if (selectedDataSources.length === 0) {
       const resp = await http.get(`/api/blog_example_plugin/example`, { query: {} } );
       setIndices(resp);
    } else {
      const dataSourceID =selectedDataSources[0].id;
      // Use the core http service to make a response to the server API.
      const resp = await http.get(`/api/blog_example_plugin/example`, {
        query: {
          dataSourceId: dataSourceID,
        }
      });
      setIndices(resp);
    }
  };
```

> Now, combine the preceding function and react component:

Author: Got it

```
retrun (
    ...
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
   {DataSourceSelectorComponent}
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
     <EuiTextColor>
       Selected: {selectedDataSources.map((ds) => ds.label).join(', ')}
   </EuiTextColor>
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
   <EuiButton type="primary" size="s" onClick={onClickHandler}>
     <FormattedMessage id="mayTest.buttonText" defaultMessage="Get Indices" />
   </EuiButton>
   <p>
     <FormattedMessage
       id="blogTest.indicesText"
       defaultMessage="Get indices: {data}"
       values={{ data: indices ? indices : 'Unknown' }}
     />
   </p>
  ...
)
```

> Congratulations! Now you can run your plugins and use the pickers to select the desired data source. 

Author: SHould be select desired data source as we do not provide mult-selection

To get indexes from a remote cluster, call `datasource1`, as shown in the following image:
<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/blog_example_remote_cluster.png">

Refer to the [blog_example_plugin](https://github.com/zhyuanqi/OpenSearch-Dashboards/tree/blog_example/examples/blog_example_plugin) repository for additional details about the example plugin code. 

## Developing, testing, and debugging

Now that you've learned how to integrate multiple data sources with OpenSearch Dashboards plugins, let's explore some advanced concepts and techniques.

### Example plugins for multiple data sources

To provide a more intuitive and direct experience, we've included an example plugin for developers to get started quickly with the components. You can enable the example plugins by running OpenSearch Dashboards with the following CLI command:
```
yarn start --run-examples
```

> With OpenSearch Dashboards running, navigate to the page and select the left menu. Under OpenSearch Dashboards, open **Developer Examples**, then select **Multiple Data Sources Integration**, as shown in the following image. On the right side, you'll find a list of pickers, each with a brief introduction and properties listed below. Feel free to experiment with the example plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With OpenSearch Dashboards running, navigate to the page and select the menu on the left. Under OpenSearch Dashboards, open **Developer Examples** and then select **Multiple Data Sources Integration**, as shown in the following image. On the right, you'll find a list of pickers, each with a brief introduction and a list of properties. Feel free to experiment with the example plugin.
```

> With OpenSearch Dashboards running, navigate to the page and select the left menu. Under OpenSearch Dashboards, open **Developer Examples**, then select **Multiple Data Sources Integration**, as shown in the following image. On the right side, you'll find a list of pickers, each with a brief introduction and properties listed below. Feel free to experiment with the example plugin.

Reviewer 3: Second sentence: Either "Under **OpenSearch Dashboards**, or the sentence should just start with "Open **Developer Examples**..."

Author: change to `Open Developer examples, ...`

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/multi_selectable.png">

### Data sources as saved objects

The data source is persisted as a saved object in the OpenSearch Dashboards system index. Upon creation, it is assigned a UUID as a unique identifier, and metadata such as the remote cluster version and associated plugins is gathered. This automatically generated data, along with user-provided information like the title, endpoint, and authentication methods, is stored as attributes of the data source object. Refer to the [related code](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/blob/main/src/plugins/data_source/common/data_sources/types.ts#L8) for the current object schema. 

## List of supported plugins/features

> Starting from version 2.14, the following external OpenSearch Dashboards plugins support multiple data sources: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting in version 2.14, the following external OpenSearch Dashboards plugins support multiple data sources: 
```

* Index Management
* Machine Learning
* Search Relevance
* Anomaly Detection
* Maps
* Security

> * Notification

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Notifications
```

* Query Workbench
* Trace Analytics 

> Multiple data sources functionality is also now available with Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB), Vega and Region Map visualization types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multiple data sources functionality is also now available with the Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB), Vega, and Region Map visualization types.
```

## Frequently asked questions 

Q: Is any UI component provided by `dataSourceManagemet` used in core OpenSearch?

> A: A data source selector is now used in Dev Tools, the tutorial, and on the saved object management page. You can see the component after setting `data_source.enabled` to `true` in your `opensearch_dashbards.yml` file.

Reviewer 3: Should "saved object management" be formatted as a UI element (the name of the page)?

Author: got it

> Q: Since a dashboard is a saved object, won't it have an associated data connection?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Q: Because a dashboard is a saved object, won't it have an associated data connection?
```

A: A data source, represented as a saved object, is identified by its unique saved object ID. Saved objects created from data sources have a `references` section containing the ID, name, and type. This reference helps identify the associated data source for the saved object. Here's an example of an index pattern reference:
```
"references": [
    {
        "id": "9dc4e190-08a0-11ef-901b-bb0301313422",
        "type": "data-source",
        "name": "dataSource"
    }
]
```

> The visualization reference is slightly different as it points to the related index pattern and uses the index pattern ID to find the corresponding data source, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The visualization reference is slightly different because it points to the related index pattern and uses the index pattern ID to find the corresponding data source, as shown in the following example:
```

```
"references": [
    {
        "name": "kibanaSavedObjectMeta.searchSourceJSON.index",
        "type": "index-pattern",
        "id": "f1613e10-08a6-11ef-901b-bb0301313422"
        }
]
```

## Conclusion

> This blog post covered the process of integrating OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources. We encourage you to experiment with multiple data sources using the provided example plugins, developed by Lu Yu. This will allow you to experience the benefits of accessing multiple data sources within a single dashboard and enable your plugin to expose a wider range of data from remote clusters.

Reviewer 3: Should we include Lu Yu's GitHub handle?

Author: I have provided how to install example plugins above

---
layout: post
title: "Developer guideline: Multiple data sources in OpenSearch Dashboards and plugins"
authors:
 - zhyuanqi

> date: 2024-05-01

Reviewer 4: Please update the date to 5/21/2024

categories:
 - technical-post

> meta_keyword: OpenSearch multiple data sources, OpenSearch Dashboards

Reviewer 4: @zhyuanqi - please update the blog with the following meta: 

meta_keywords:  multiple data sources in OpenSearch, OpenSearch Dashboards plugins, using multiple data sources 

meta_description: Leverage this comprehensive guide to learn how you can integrate multiple multiple data sources in OpenSearch to create visually compelling dashboards using plugins.

> meta_keyword: OpenSearch multiple data sources, OpenSearch Dashboards

Author: got it

.
├── README.md
├── common
│   └── index.ts
├── opensearch_dashboards.json
├── package.json
├── public
│   ├── application.tsx
│   ├── components
│   │   └── app.tsx
│   ├── index.scss
│   ├── index.ts
│   ├── plugin.ts
│   └── types.ts
├── server
│   ├── index.ts
│   ├── plugin.ts
│   ├── routes
│   │   └── index.ts
│   └── types.ts
├── translations
│   └── ja-JP.json
└── tsconfig.json
```
For more information about the OpenSearch Dashboards Plugin Generator, please refer to the documentation on the [plugin generator](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/blob/main/packages/osd-plugin-generator/README.md). Before utilizing multiple data sources, it's necessary to enable the data_source.enabled setting, which is disabled by default. To do this, open the `opensearch_dashboards.yml` file and set `data_source.enabled: true`, then save the YAML file. Now you have your local development environment ready, we can start to integrate Dashboards plugin with multiple data sources. 

### 1.2 Step 2: Configure plugin to add dependencies

> In the opensarch_dashboards.json file of your Dashboards plugin, add data source and data source management in optional plugins section. The data source plugin provides the clients to connect with multiple data sources. Data source management plugin provides generic interfaces to consume data source components such as data source menu and/or data source selector to be used on pages depending on specific use case. 

Author: sure

```
{
  "id": "blogExamplePlugin",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "opensearchDashboardsVersion": "opensearchDashboards",
  "server": true,
  "ui": true,
  "requiredPlugins": ["navigation"],
  "optionalPlugins": ["dataSource", "dataSourceManagement"]
}
```

### 1.3 Step 3: Add datasource parameter to plugins on server side

**Server side: Verify if multiple data sources is enabled and register plugin API schema accordingly**

> If your Dashboards plugin depends on a new API provided by your new server side plugin other than OpenSearch APIs, you can register the schema for the API or pass the request path as parameters when initializing the request. 

Author: Got it

```
import { IRouter } from '../../../../src/core/server';
import { schema } from '@osd/config-schema';

export function defineRoutes(router: IRouter, dataSourceEnabled: boolean) {
  router.get(
    {
      path: `/api/blog_example_plugin/example`,
      validate: {
        query: schema.object({
          dataSourceId: schema.maybe(schema.string({ defaultValue: '' }))
        }),
      },
    },
    async (context, request, response) => {
      let resp;
      if (dataSourceEnabled && request.query.dataSourceId) {
        const dataSourceId = request.query.dataSourceId;
        const client = await context.dataSource.opensearch.getClient(dataSourceId)
        resp = await client.cat.indices();
      } else {
        resp = await context.core.opensearch.client.asCurrentUser.transport.request({
          method: 'GET',
          path: `_cat/indices`,
        });
      }
      return response.ok({
        body: resp.body,
      });
  });
}
```

### 1.5 Step 5: Register datasource management plugin under public folder

> *1.5.1 Extract dataSourceManagement object in plugin module under public folder*

Author: sure

> The Data Source Management plugin offers various react components through a generic interface for use by your Dashboards plugin. To use data source UI component interfaces, extract the `dataSourceManagement` object in the plugin module in a public folder and pass it to the main application: 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Data Source Management plugin provides react components through a generic interface for your OpenSearch Dashboards plugin. To use the data source UI component interfaces, extract the `dataSourceManagement` object from the plugin module in a public folder and pass it to the main application: 
```

```
# public/plugin.ts
import { DataSourceManagementPluginSetup } from '../../../src/plugins/data_source_management/public';

export interface PluginSetupDependencies {
  dataSourceManagement: DataSourceManagementPluginSetup;
}

export class BlogExamplePluginPlugin
  implements Plugin<BlogExamplePluginPluginSetup, BlogExamplePluginPluginStart> {
  public setup(
    core: CoreSetup,
    { dataSourceManagement }: PluginSetupDependencies
  ): BlogExamplePluginPluginSetup {
    core.application.register({
      id: 'blogExamplePlugin',
      title: PLUGIN_NAME,
      async mount(params: AppMountParameters) {
        const { renderApp } = await import('./application');
        const [coreStart, depsStart] = await core.getStartServices();
        return renderApp(
          coreStart,
          depsStart as AppPluginStartDependencies,
          params,
          dataSourceManagement
        );
      },
    });
    .....
}
```

> #### 1.5.2 How to use UI component interfaces provide by the `dataSourceManagement` plugin

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### 1.5.2 How to use UI component interfaces provide by the `dataSourceManagement` plugin
```
```suggestion
Now, use the UI component interfaces provided by the `dataSourceManagement` plugin.
```

> Now that we've initialized the `dataSourceManagement` plugin, it is time to use the component interfaces it provides.  Using selector as an example below, it used OUI combobox as base component and provides a user interface for selecting data sources. It is stateful and contains the logic to fetch available data sources, return user selection back to user via callback function, and update the UI elements accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that you've initialized the `dataSourceManagement` plugin, you can use the component interfaces it provides.  The example selector below uses OUI combobox as a base component and provides a UI for selecting data sources. It is stateful and contains the logic to fetch available data sources, return the user selection back to the user through a callback function, and update the UI elements accordingly.
```

```
const DataSourceSelector = dataSourceManagement.ui.DataSourceSelector;
const DataSourceSelectorComponent = (
  <DataSourceSelector
    savedObjectsClient={savedObjects.client}
    notifications={notifications.toasts}
    fullWidth={false}
    onSelectedDataSource={(ds) => setSelectedDataSources(ds)}
    disabled={false}
  />
);
```
To retrieve the id of the selected remote data source, developers can utilize the `onSelectedDataSource` callback function. This function is triggered whenever there is a change in the data source selection. Developers can utilize the useState hook to retrieve the selected data source ID and use it to get related information and update the remaining page.
```
const [selectedDataSources, setSelectedDataSources] = useState<string[]>([]);
```

> ### 1.6 Step 6: run and see a working example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 1.6 Step 6: Run a working example
```

> Now that we have everything ready. Let’s combine it to a working example plugins! Let’s first added a datasource selector in app.tsx.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that everything is ready, you can combine it into a working example plugin! First add a data source selector in app.tsx:
```

      const resp = await http.get(`/api/blog_example_plugin/example`, {
        query: {
          dataSourceId: dataSourceID,
        }
      });
      setIndices(resp);
    }
  };
```
Now combine the above function and react component:
```
retrun (
    ...
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
   {DataSourceSelectorComponent}
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
     <EuiTextColor>
       Selected: {selectedDataSources.map((ds) => ds.label).join(', ')}
   </EuiTextColor>
   <EuiHorizontalRule />
   <EuiButton type="primary" size="s" onClick={onClickHandler}>
     <FormattedMessage id="mayTest.buttonText" defaultMessage="Get Indices" />
   </EuiButton>
   <p>
     <FormattedMessage
       id="blogTest.indicesText"
       defaultMessage="Get indices: {data}"
       values={{ data: indices ? indices : 'Unknown' }}
     />
   </p>
  ...
)
```

Congratulations! Now you can run your plugins and use the pickers to select the desired data source. 
Get indexes from remote cluster call datasource1:
<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/blog_example_remote_cluster.png">

Get indexes from a local cluster:

> <img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/blog_example_local_cluster.png">

Reviewer 5: Deleted for redundancy

> For additional details on the example plugin code, please refer to this [repo](https://github.com/zhyuanqi/OpenSearch-Dashboards/tree/blog_example/examples/blog_example_plugin). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For additional details on the example plugin code, please refer to [this repo](https://github.com/zhyuanqi/OpenSearch-Dashboards/tree/blog_example/examples/blog_example_plugin). 
```

## 2 Developing, testing and debugging

Now that we've learned how to integrate multiple data sources with Dashboards plugin, let's move on to the next section and explore some advanced knowledge and skills.

### 2.1 Example Plugins for MDS

To help developers get a quick start with the components, we've included an example plugin for a more intuitive and direct experience. You can run Dashboards with CLI below to enable the example plugins. 
```
yarn start --run-examples
```

> Once Dashboards are up and running, navigate to the page and click on the left-side menu. From there, open the Developer examples under OpenSearch Dashboards. Then click on Multiple Data Sources Integration. On the right side of the page, you'll find a comprehensive list of pickers, each accompanied by a brief introduction and a set of properties listed below. Feel free to explore and experiment with the example plugin. 

Author: Got it

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-01-develop-guideline-multiple-data-source-in-opensearch-and-plugins/multi_selectable.png">

> ### 2.2 The data source as a saved object

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Data sources as saved objects
```

> The data source is persisted as a saved object in the Dashboards system index. At the time of creation, a UUID is assigned as its unique identifier and data source metadata is also gathered, including the remote cluster version and associated plugins. This automatically generated data, as well as user-provided information including the title, endpoint, and authentication methods, are stored as attributes of the data source object. For the current schema of the object, refer to the [related code](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/blob/main/src/plugins/data_source/common/data_sources/types.ts#L8). 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The data source is persisted as a saved object in the OpenSearch Dashboards system index. Upon creation, it is assigned a UUID as a unique identifier, and metadata such as the remote cluster version and associated plugins is gathered. This automatically generated data, along with user-provided information like the title, endpoint, and authentication methods, is stored as attributes of the data source object. Refer to the [related code](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/blob/main/src/plugins/data_source/common/data_sources/types.ts#L8) for the current object schema. 
```

> ## 3 FAQ 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Frequently asked questions 
```

Reviewer 5: I suggest moving the FAQs to after the plugin list section.

Author: Got it.

> ## 3 FAQ 

Reviewer 5: +1

Is any UI component provided by dataSourceManagemet used in core?

> Data source selector is now used in devtools, tutorial, saved object management page. You can see the component after setting `data_source.enabled` to true in `opensearch_dashbards.yml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A: A data source selector is now used in Dev Tools, the tutorial, and on the saved object management page. You can see the component after setting `data_source.enabled` to true in `opensearch_dashbards.yml`.
```

> A: A data source selector is now used in Dev Tools, the tutorial, and on the saved object management page. You can see the component after setting `data_source.enabled` to true in `opensearch_dashbards.yml`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A: A data source selector is now used in Dev Tools, the tutorial, and on the saved object management page. You can see the component after setting `data_source.enabled` to `true` in your `opensearch_dashbards.yml` file.
```

> Given that a dashboard is a saved object itself, I assume it will not have a data connection associated with it?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Q: Given that a dashboard is a saved object itself, will it not have a data connection associated with it?
```

> Q: Given that a dashboard is a saved object itself, will it not have a data connection associated with it?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Q: Given that a dashboard is a saved object itself, will it not have a data connection associated with it?
```
```suggestion
Q: Since a dashboard is a saved object, won't it have an associated data connection?
```

> A data source, represented as a saved object, is identified by its unique saved object ID. For saved objects created from data sources, it has a references section with ID, name and type. This reference helps us to identify the associated data source for the saved object. Here is an example of a index-pattern reference.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A: A data source, represented as a saved object, is identified by its unique saved object ID. Saved objects created from data sources have a references section containing the ID, name, and type. This reference helps you to identify the associated data source for the saved object. Here is an example of a index pattern reference:
```

> A: A data source, represented as a saved object, is identified by its unique saved object ID. Saved objects created from data sources have a references section containing the ID, name, and type. This reference helps you to identify the associated data source for the saved object. Here is an example of a index pattern reference:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A: A data source, represented as a saved object, is identified by its unique saved object ID. Saved objects created from data sources have a `references` section containing the ID, name, and type. This reference helps identify the associated data source for the saved object. Here's an example of an index pattern reference:
```

```
"references": [
    {
        "id": "9dc4e190-08a0-11ef-901b-bb0301313422",
        "type": "data-source",
        "name": "dataSource"
    }
]
```

> The visualization reference is slightly different as it points to the related index-pattern and use the index-pattern id to find corresponding data source. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The visualization reference is slightly different because it points to the related index pattern and uses the index pattern ID to find the corresponding data source: 
```

```
"references": [
    {
        "name": "kibanaSavedObjectMeta.searchSourceJSON.index",
        "type": "index-pattern",
        "id": "f1613e10-08a6-11ef-901b-bb0301313422"
        }
]
```

> ## 4 List of supported Plugins/Feature

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 4 List of supported plugins/features
```

> ## 4 List of supported plugins/features

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## List of supported plugins/features
```

> Starting in version 2.14, multiple data sources are supported in nine external Dashboards plugins: 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Starting from version 2.14, the following external OpenSearch Dashboards plugins support multiple data sources: 
```

> Besides native multiple datasource support for Discover App, Dashboards, Visualization, Dev Tool, Example Data. Starting 2.14, we have enabled multiple datasource in 9 external Dashboards plugins: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting in version 2.14, multiple data sources are supported in nine external Dashboards plugins: 
```

> * index management

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Index Management
```

> * machine learning

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Machine Learning
```

> * search relevance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Search Relevance
```

> * anomaly detection

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Anomaly Detection
```

> * maps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Maps
```

> * security

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Security
```

> * notification

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Notification
```

> * query workbench

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Query Workbench
```

> * trace-analytics 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Trace Analytics 
```

> Additionally, we've extended this functionality to two core visualizations: Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB) and Region Map.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Multiple data sources functionality is also now available with Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB) and Region Map visualization types.
```

Reviewer 5: Should we also include Vega? See PR https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/pull/2837. FYI--user documentation is in process for this topic.

Author: Got it

> ## 5 Conclusion

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

> Additionally, we've extended this functionality to 2 core visualizations: Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB) and Region Map as part of Map Plugin. We are also thrilled about further expanding support for multiple data sources across additional plugins and incorporate more features in the future!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, we've extended this functionality to two core visualizations: Time Series Visual Builder (TSVB) and Region Map.
```

> In this blog post, we've covered the process of integrating OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources. We strongly encourage you to experiment with multiple data sources using the example plugins provided above. Thanks to Lu Yu for developing the example plugin! This exploration will enable you to experience the benefits of accessing multiple data sources within a single dashboard as well as allow your plugin to expose a wider range of data from remote clusters.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This blog post covered the process of integrating OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources. We encourage you to experiment with multiple data sources using the provided example plugins, developed by Lu Yu. This will allow you to experience the benefits of accessing multiple data sources within a single dashboard and enable your plugin to expose a wider range of data from remote clusters.
```

> In this blog, we've covered the process of integrating OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources. We strongly encourage you to explore and experiment with multiple data sources using the example plugins provided above. Thanks to Lu Yu  for developing the example plugin! This exploration will enable you to experience the benefits of accessing multiple data sources within a single dashboard, as well as allow your plugin to expose a wider range of data from remote clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we've covered the process of integrating OpenSearch Dashboards plugins with multiple data sources. We strongly encourage you to experiment with multiple data sources using the example plugins provided above. Thanks to Lu Yu for developing the example plugin! This exploration will enable you to experience the benefits of accessing multiple data sources within a single dashboard as well as allow your plugin to expose a wider range of data from remote clusters.
```
